                   Unplanned-for Flying Object
                                          by Edward M. Lerner
This story copyright 1994 by Edward M. Lerner.This copy was created for Jean Hardy's personal
use.All other rights are reserved. Thank you for honoring the copyright.

Published by Seattle Book Company, www.seattlebook.com.

*    *    *


 This story first appeared in Analog Science Fiction and Fact, September 1994
***


   The extraterrestrial object soared silently around the curve of the expressway, spewing intense radiant
energy. Powers uncontrollable by mere man kept the object hovering just above the horizon.
   As a wave of red tail lights flashed towards him, Don Shaw stepped firmly onto his brakes. The crunch
of metal and tinkle of headlamps somewhere to the rear announced the presence of a driver with reflexes
slower than his own.
   In the intensely bright light, buildings and lampposts cast long, knife-edged shadows onto the road.
Reflections from the glowing entity glinted off the chrome, paint, and glass of the river of cars before him.
Heat from the distant orb struck at him through his windshield. An unseen convection current caught a
weathered sheet of newspaper, lifting it over Don's car.
   He glanced into the pickup truck stuck beside him. The yahoo behind the wheel squinted, gape-jawed,
into the glare. The bill of his backwards baseball cap threw its shadow uselessly behind him. On his other
side, a well-coiffed, well-dressed businesswoman tried in vain to ward off the light with a well-manicured
hand.
   Don pondered the other-worldly object that floated so effortlessly before him. Some of the finest
minds in the world had studied it closely. Indirect evidence suggested, he'd read, that the visitor was
fusion powered. Federal authorities had tracked its course and extrapolated its appearance with great
accuracy, even forecasting its arrival through the local media.
   Their warnings had fallen upon deaf ears.
   Trapped between exits, there was nowhere to go now but forward. Nowhere to head but straight
towards the luminous apparition. He waited for those ahead of him to reach the same decision. They
were slow to do so: in ten minutes, he crept forward by less than a mile.
   Finally, Don could bear his entrapment no longer. He rolled down his window and stuck his head
through the opening. Harmful actinic rays from the distant object struck at his unprotected face.
   "Idiots!" he shrieked. "Imbeciles! Buy yourselves a pair of shades.
   "The sun is going to keep rising every morning."
