This showed up in Tesseracts 5, edited by Yves Meynard and
Robert Runté, one of a semiregular antho series put out by
Tesseracts Books of Edmonton (now engulfed and incorporated
into Edge Books, of Calgary). It basically uses a failed
relationship as a vantage point on global ecological collapse,
through the eyes of a failed academic who's learned that quantum
mechanics can be used for things beyond the usual parallel worlds
and DVD players.

Denial, for instance...


                             Bethlehem
                                 by
                             Peter Watts


   It was her own damn fault.
   No. No, that's not right. But Christ, look at this place; what did
she expect, living here?
   A dried blood stain smears a meter of sidewalk, a rusty
backdrop for broken bottles and the twisted skeleton of an old ten-
speed. Everything is too big. All this jagged structure, so solid
and visible, frightens me. I focus on the stain, search for some hint
of its unseen complexity. I want to throw myself down through
familiar orders of magnitude and see inside; dead erythrocytes,
molecules of ferrous haemoglobin, single atoms dancing in
comforting envelopes of quantum uncertainty.
   But I can't. It's just a featureless brown blot, and all I can see is
that it was once part of someone like me.
   She's not answering. I've been buzzing for five minutes now.
   I'm the only one in sight, sole occupant of a narrow window in
time: all the victims have made for cover, and the monsters aren't
out yet. But they're coming, Darwin's agents, always ready to weed
out the unfit.
   I push the buzzer again. "Jan, it's Keith." Why doesn't she
answer? Maybe she can't, maybe someone got in, maybe...
   Maybe she just wants to be alone. That's what she said on the
phone, isn't it?
2                                                           Bethlehem

    So why am I here? It's not that I didn't believe her, exactly. It's
not even that I'm worried about her safety. It's more a matter of
procedure; when your best friend has been raped, you're supposed
to be supportive. That's the rule, even these days. And Janet is my
friend, by any practical definition of the term.
    Glass breaks somewhere in the distance.
    "Jan--"
    If I leave now I can still make it back before it gets too late. The
sun doesn't go down for at least another twenty minutes. This was
a stupid idea anyway.
    I turn away from the gate, and something clicks behind me. I
look back; a green light glows by the buzzer. I touch the grating,
briefly, jerking my hand back after the slightest contact. Again, for
longer this time. No shock. The gate swings inward.
    Still no words from the speaker.
    "Jan?" I say into the street.
    After a moment, she answers. "Come on up, Keith. I--I'm glad
you came by..."
                                    *
    Five floors high, Janet bolts the door behind me. The wall
holds her up while I step past.
    Her footsteps trail me down the hall, stiff, shuffling. In the
living room she passes without eye contact, heading for the fridge.
"Something to drink?"
    "There's a choice?"
    "Not much of one. No dairy products, the truck got hijacked
again. They had beer, though." Her voice is strong, vibrant even,
but she walks as though rigor mortis has already taken hold. Every
movement seems painful.
    The room is dimly lit; a lamp with an orange shade in one
corner, a TV with the volume down. When she opens the fridge,
bluish light spills across the bruises on her face. One of her eyes is
swollen and pulpy.
    She closes the refrigerator. Her face falls into merciful eclipse.
She straightens in stages, turns to face me, bottle in hand. I take it
without a word, careful not to touch her.
    "You didn't have to come," she says. "I'm doing okay."
Peter Watts                                                       3

   I shrug. "I just thought, if you needed anything..."
   Janet smiles through the swelling. Even that seems to hurt.
"Thanks, but I picked up some stuff coming back from the
precinct."
   "Janet, I'm sorry." How else can you say it?
   "It wasn't your fault. It was mine."
   I should disagree. I want to disagree.
   "It was," she insists, although I haven't spoken. "I should have
seen it coming. Simple scenario, predictable outcome. I should
have known."
   "Christ, Jan, why are you still living out here?" It sounds like
an accusation.
   She looks through the window. By now it's dark enough to see
the fires on the east side.
   "I lived here before," she reminds me. "I'm not going to let the
fuckers drive me out now."
   Before. I follow her gaze, see a tiny dark spot on the sidewalk
below. Families lived here once. It's April. Warm enough that
kids would be playing out there now. There are people who think
that somewhere, they still do. Somewhere at right angles to this
twisted place, some place where the probability wave broke onto a
more peaceful reality. I wish I could believe that. There would be
a little solace in the thought that in some other timeline, children
are playing just outside.
   But that world, if it even exists, diverged from ours a long time
ago. Three, maybe four years...
   "It happened so fast," I murmur.
   "Fold catastrophe." Absently, Janet speaks to the window.
"Change isn't gradual, Keith, you keep forgetting. Things just
cruise along until they hit a breakpoint, and zap: new equilibrium.
Like falling off a cliff."
   This is how she sees the world: not reality, but a trajectory in
phase space. Her senses gather the same data as mine, yet
everything she sees sounds so alien...
   "What cliff?" I ask her. "What breakpoint? What's breaking?"
   "What, you don't believe what they say?"
4                                                         Bethlehem

    They say a lot of things. With perfect hindsight, they moan
about the inevitable collapse of an economy based on perpetual
growth. Or they blame an obscenely successful computer virus, a
few lines of code that spread worldwide and turned the global
economy to static overnight. They say it isn't their fault.
    "Twenty years ago they'd be blaming alligators in the sewers," I
remark.
    Janet starts to speak; her voice erupts in a great wracking cough.
She wipes her mouth with the back of her hand, winces. "Well, if
you'd prefer, there's always Channel six's interpretation," she says,
pointing to the TV.
    I look at her, quizzical.
    "The Second Coming. We're almost up to crucifixion plus two
thousand years."
    I shake my head. "Doesn't make any less sense than most of the
stuff I've heard."
    "Well."
    Mutual discomfort rises around us.
    "Well, then," I say at last, turning to leave. "I'll come by
tomorrow, see how you're doing--"
    She gives me a look. "Come on, boss. You know you're not
going anywhere tonight. You wouldn't even make it to Granville."
    I open my mouth to protest. She pre-empts me: "There's a bus
goes by around eight every morning, one of those new retrofits
with the fullerene plating. Almost safe, if you don't mind being a
couple of hours late for work."
    Jan frowns for a second, as though struck by sudden realization.
    "I think I'll work at home for a few days, though," she adds. "If
that's okay."
    "Don't be ridiculous. Take some time off. Relax."
    "Actually, I doubt that I'll really be in the mood to relax."
    "I mean--"
    She manages another smile. "I appreciate the gesture, Keith, but
sitting around just wallowing...it would drive me crazy. I want to
work. I have to work."
    "Jan--"
Peter Watts                                                        5

   "It's no big deal. I'll log on tomorrow, just for a minute or two.
Should be able to download what I need before any bugs get in,
and I'll be set for the rest of the day. Okay?"
   "Okay." I'm relieved, of course. At least I've got the good grace
to be ashamed about it.
   "In the meantime" --she takes a wooden step towards the hall
closet-- "I'll make up the couch for you."
    "Listen, don't worry about anything. Just go lie down, I'll make
supper."
   "None for me. I'm not hungry."
   "Well, okay." Damn. I don't know what else I'm supposed to
do. "Do you want me to call anyone? Family, or--"
   "No. That's fine, Keith." There's just a hint of caution in her
voice. "Thanks anyway."
   I let it lie. This is why we're so close. Not because we share the
same interests, or are bound by a common passion of scientific
discovery, or even because I sometimes give her senior authorship
on our papers. It's because we don't intrude or pry or try to figure
each other out. There's an unspoken recognition of limits, an
acceptance. There's complete trust, because we never tell each
other anything.
                                     *
   I 'm down in the real world when I hear her name.
   It happens, occasionally. Sounds filter down from the huge
clumsy universe where other people live; I can usually avoid
hearing them. Not this time. There are too many of them, and
they're all talking about Janet.
   I try to keep working. Phospholipids, neatly excised from a
single neuron, lumber like crystalline behemoths across my field
of vision. But the voices outside won't shut up, they're dragging
me up there with them. I try to block them out, cling to the
molecules that surround me, but it doesn't work. Ions recede into
membranes, membranes into whole cells, physics to chemistry to
sheer gross morphology.
   The microscope still holds its image, but I'm outside of it now.
I shut off the eyephones, blink at a room crowded with machines
and the pithed circuitry of a half-dissected salamander.
6                                                        Bethlehem

    The lounge is just down the hall from my office. People in
there are talking about rape, talking about Jan's misfortune as
though it was somehow rare or exotic. They trade tales of personal
violation like old war stories, try to outdo each other with
incantations of sympathy and outrage.
    I don't understand the commotion. Janet is just another victim
of the odds; crime waves and quantum waves have that much in
common. There are a million unrealized worlds in which she
would have escaped unscathed. In a different million, she would
have been killed outright. But this is the one we observed. Here,
yesterday, she was only brutalized, and today it will probably be
someone else.
    Why do they keep going on like this? Is talking about it all day
going to get any of us into a universe where such things don't
happen?
    Why can't they just leave it alone?
                                    *
    "No fucking convergence!" she yells from the living room. The
power is off again; she storms down the hall towards me, a frenetic
silhouette backlit by the reflected light of distant fires. "Singular
Hessian, it says! I worked on the chiasma maps for five fucking
hours and I couldn't even get the stats to work, and now the fucking
power goes out!"
    She pushes a printout into my hands. It's a blurry shadow in the
dark. "Where's your flashlight?" I ask.
    "Batteries are dead. Fucking typical. Hang on a sec." I follow
her back into the living room. She kneels at a corner cabinet, roots
through its interior; assorted small objects bounce onto the floor to
muffled expressions of disgust.
    Her damaged arm exceeds some limit, goes rigid. She cries out.
    I come up behind. "Are--"
    Janet puts one hand behind her, palm out, pushing at the space
between us. "I'm okay." She doesn't turn around.
    I wait for her to move.
    After a moment she gets up, slowly. Light flares in her palm.
She sets a candle on the coffee table. The light is feeble, but
enough to read by.
Peter Watts                                                         7

    "I'll show you," she says, reaching for the printout.
    But I've already seen it. "You've confounded two of your
variables."
    She stops. "What?"
    "Your interaction term. It's just a linear transform of action
potential and calcium."
    She takes the paper from my hand, studies it a moment. "Shit.
That's it." She scowls at the numbers, as though they might have
changed when I looked at them. "What a fucking stupid mistake."
    There's a brief, uncomfortable silence. Then Janet crushes the
printout into a ball and throws it at the floor.
    "Fucking stupid!"
    She turns away from me and glares out the window.
    I stand there like an idiot and wonder what to do.
    And suddenly the apartment comes back to life around us. The
living room lights, revived by some far-off and delinquent
generator, flicker and then hold steady. Jan's TV blares grainy
light and faint, murky sound from the corner. I turn towards it,
grateful for the distraction.
    The screen offers me a woman, about Janet's age but empty
somehow, wearing the shell-shocked look you see everywhere
these days. I catch a flash of metal around her wrists before the
view changes, shows us the twisted, spindly corpse of an infant
with too many fingers. A lidless third eye sits over the bridge of its
nose, like a milky black marble embedded in plasticine.
    "Hmm," Janet says. "Copy errors."
    She's watching the television. My stomach unclenches a bit.
This month's infanticide stats crawl up the screen like a weather
report.
    "Polydactyly and a pineal eye. You didn't used to see so many
random copy errors."
    I don't see her point. Birth defects are old news; they've been
rising ever since things started falling apart. Every now and then
one of the networks makes the same tired connection, blames
everything on radiation or chemicals in the water supply, draws
ominous parallels with the fall of Rome.
    At least it's got her talking again.
8                                                        Bethlehem

   "I bet it's happening to other information systems too," she
muses, "not just genetic ones. Like all those viruses in the net; you
can't log on for two minutes these days without something trying to
lay its eggs in your files. Same damn thing, I bet."
   I can't suppress a nervous laugh. Janet cocks her head at me.
   "Sorry," I say. "It's just--you never give up, you know? You'd
go crazy if you went a day without being able to find a pattern
somewhere--"
   And suddenly I know why she lives here, why she won't hide
with the rest of us up on campus. She's a missionary in enemy
territory. She's defying chaos, she is proclaiming her faith; even
here, she is saying, there are rules and the universe will damn well
make sense. It will behave.
   Her whole life is a search for order. No fucking way is she
going to let something as, as random as rape get in the way.
Violence is noise, nothing more; Janet's after signal. Even now,
she's after signal.
   I suppose that's a good sign.
                                   *
   The signal crashes along the neuron like a tsunami. Ions in its
path stand at sudden attention. A conduit forms, like a strip of
mountain range shaking itself flat; the signal spills into it.
Electricity dances along the optic nerve and lights up the primitive
amphibian brain from an endless millimeter away.
   Backtrack the lightning to its source. Here, in the tangled
circuitry on the retina; the fading echo of a single photon. A lone
quantum event, reaching up from the real world and into my
machines. Uncertainty made flesh.
   I made it happen, here in my lab. Just by watching. If a photon
emits in the forest and there's no one to see it, it doesn't exist.
   This is how the world works: nothing is real until someone
looks at it. Even the subatomic fragments of our own bodies don't
exist except as probability waves; it takes an act of conscious
observation at the quantum level to collapse those waves into
something solid. The whole universe is unreal at its base, an
infinite and utterly hypothetical void but for a few specks where
someone's passing glance congeals the mix.
Peter Watts                                                            9

   It's no use arguing. Einstein tried. Bohm tried. Even
Schrödinger, that hater of cats, tried. But our brains didn't evolve
to cope with the space between atoms. You can't fight numbers; a
century of arcane quantum mathematics doesn't leave any recourse
to common sense.
   A lot of people still can't accept it. They're afraid of the fact that
nothing is real, so they claim that everything is. They say we're
surrounded by parallel worlds just as real as this one, places where
we won the Guerre de la Separatiste or the Houston Inferno never
happened, an endless comforting smorgasbord of alternative
realities. It sounds silly, but they really don't have much choice.
The parallel universe schtick is the only consistent alternative to
nonexistence, and nonexistence terrifies them.
   It empowers me.
   I can shape reality, just by looking at it. Anyone can. Or I can
avert my eyes, respect its privacy, leave it unseen and totipotent.
The thought makes me a little giddy. I can almost forget how far
I'm slipping behind, how much I need Janet's hand to guide me,
because down here in the real world it doesn't have to matter.
Nothing is irrevocable until observed.
                                   *
   She buzzes me through on the first ring. The elevator's acting
strangely today; it opens halfway, closes, opens again like an eager
mouth. I take the stairs.
   The door opens while I'm raising my hand to knock. She stands
completely still.
   "He came back," she says.
   No. Even these days, the odds are just too--
   "He was right there. He did it again." Her voice is completely
expressionless. She locks the door, leads me down the shadowy
hallway.
   "He got in? How? Where did he--"
   Gray light spills into her living room. We're up against the wall,
off to one side of her window. I look around the edge of the
curtain, down at the deserted street.
   She points outside. "He was right there, he did it again, he did it
again--"
10                                                       Bethlehem

    To someone else. That's what she means.
    Oh.
    "She was so stupid," Janet's fingers grip the threadbare curtain,
clenching, unclenching. "She was out there all alone. Stupid bitch.
Should have seen it coming."
    "When did it happen?"
    "I don't know. A couple of hours."
    "Did anyone--" I ask, because of course I can't say Did you- -
    "No. I don't think anybody else even saw it." She releases the
curtain. "She got off easy, all things considered. She walked
away."
    I don't ask whether the phone lines were up. I don't ask if Janet
tried to help, if she shouted or threw something or even let the
woman inside afterwards. Janet's not stupid.
    A distant mirage sparkles in the deepening twilight: the campus.
There's another oasis, a bit nearer, over by False Creek, and the
edge of a third if I crane my neck. Everything else is grey or black
or flickering orange.
    Gangrene covers the body. Just a few remnant tissues still alive.
    "You're sure it was the same guy?" I wonder.
    "Who the fuck cares!" she screams. She catches herself, turns
away. Her fists ball up at her sides.
    Finally, she turns back to look at me.
    "Yes it was," she says in a tight voice. "I'm sure."
    I never know what I'm supposed to do.
    I know what I'm supposed to feel, though. My heart should go
out to her, to anyone so randomly brutalized. This much should be
automatic, unthinking. Suddenly I can see her face, really see it, a
fragile mask of control teetering on the edge of meltdown; and so
much more behind, held barely in check. I've never seen her look
like this before, even the day it happened to her. Maybe I just
didn't notice. I wait for it to affect me, to fill me with love or
sympathy or even pity. She needs something from me. She's my
friend. At least that's what I call her. I look for something,
anything, that would make me less of a liar. I go down as deep as I
can, and find nothing but my own passionate curiosity.
Peter Watts                                                         11

   "What do you want me to do?" I ask. I can barely hear my own
voice
   Something changes in her face. "Nothing. Nothing, Keith.
This is something I've got to work through on my own, you know?"
   I shift my weight and try to figure out whether she means it.
   "I could stay here for a few days," I say at last. "If you want."
   "Sure." She looks out the window, her face more distant than
ever. "Whatever you like."
                                    *
   "They lost Mars!" he wails, grabbing me by the shoulders.
   I know the face; he's about three doors down the hall. But I
can't     remember       the    name,     it's...wait,   Chris,   Chris
something...Fletcher. That's it.
   "All the Viking data," he's saying, "from the 70's, you know,
NASA said they had it archived, they said I could have it no
problem, I planned my whole fucking thesis around it!"
   "It got lost?" It figures; data files everywhere are corrupting in
record numbers these days.
   "No, they know exactly where it is. I can go down and pick it
up any time I want," Fletcher says bitterly.
   "So what's--"
   "It's all on these big magnetic disks--"
   "Magnetic?"
   "--and of course magmedia have been obsolete for fucking
decades, and when NASA upgraded their equipment they
somehow missed the Viking data." He pounds the wall, emits a
hysterical little giggle. "So they've got all this data that nobody can
access. There probably isn't a computer stodgy enough anywhere
on the continent."
   I tell Janet about it afterwards. I expect her to shake her head
and make commiserating noises, that's too bad or what an awful
thing to happen. But she doesn't even look away from the window.
She just nods, and says, "Loss of information. Like what happened
to me."
   I look outside. No stars visible, of course. Just sullen amber
reflections on the bottom of the clouds.
12                                                       Bethlehem

    "I can't even remember being raped," she remarks. "Funny,
you'd think it would be one of those things that stick in your mind.
And I know it happened, I can remember the context and the
aftermath and I can piece the story together, but I've lost the
actual...event..."
    From behind, I can see the curve of her cheek and the edge of a
smile. I haven't seen Janet smile in a long time. It seems like
years.
    "Can you prove that the earth revolves around the sun?" she
asks. "Can you prove it's not the other way around?"
    "What?" I circle to her left, a wary orbit. Her face comes into
view, smooth and almost unmarked by now, like a mask.
    "You can't, can you? If you ever could. It's been erased. Or
maybe it's just lost. We've all forgotten so much..."
    She's so calm. I've never seen her so calm. It's almost
frightening.
    "You know, I'll bet after a while we forget things as fast as we
learn them," she remarks. "I bet that's always the way it's been."
    "Why do you say that?" I keep my voice carefully neutral.
    "You can't store everything, there's not enough room. How can
you take in the new without writing over the old?"
    "Come on, Jan." I try for a light touch: "Our brains are running
out of disk space?"
    "Why not? We're finite."
    Jesus, she's serious.
    "Not that finite. We don't even know what most of the brain
does, yet."
    "Maybe it doesn't do anything. Maybe it's like our DNA, maybe
most of it's junk. You remember back when they found--"
    "I remember." I don't want to hear what they found, because
I've been trying to forget it for years. They found perfectly healthy
people with almost no brain tissue. They found people living
among us, heads full of spinal fluid, making do with a thin lining
of nerve cells where their brains should be. They found people
growing up to be engineers and schoolteachers before discovering
that they should have been vegetables instead.
Peter Watts                                                       13

   They never found any answers. God knows they looked hard
enough. I heard they were making some progress, though, before--
   Loss of information, Jan says. Limited disk space. She's still
smiling at me, insight shines from her eyes with a giddy radiance.
But I can see her vision now, and I don't know what she's smiling
about. I see two spheres expanding, one within the other, and the
inner one is gaining. The more I learn the more I lose, my own
core erodes away from inside. All the basics, dissolving; how do I
know that the earth orbits the sun?
   Most of my life is an act of faith.
                                   *
   I'm half a block from safety when he drops down on me from a
second-story window. I get lucky; he makes a telltale noise on the
way down. I almost get out of his way. We graze each other and
he lands hard on the pavement, twisting his ankle.
   Technically, handguns are still illegal. I pull mine out and shoot
him in the stomach before he can recover.
   A flicker of motion. Suddenly on my left, a woman as big as
me, face set and sullen, standing where there was only pavement a
moment ago. Her hands are buried deep in the pockets of a torn
overcoat. One of them seems to be holding something.
   Weapon or bluff? Particle or wave? Door number one or door
number two?
   I point the gun at her. I try very hard to look like someone who
hasn't just used his last bullet. For one crazy moment I think that
maybe it doesn't even matter what happens here, whether I live or
die, because maybe there is a parallel universe, some impossible
angle away, where everything works out fine.
   No. Nothing happens unless observed. Maybe if I just look the
other way...
   She's gone, swallowed by the same alley that disgorged her. I
step over the gurgling thing twitching on the sidewalk.
   "You can't stay here," I tell Janet when I reach her refuge. "I
don't care how many volts they pump through the fence, this place
isn't safe."
   "Sure it is," she says. She's got the TV tuned to Channel 6,
God's own mouthpiece coming through strong and clear; the
14                                                           Bethlehem

Reborns have a satellite up in geosynch and that fucker never
seems to go offline.
   She's not watching it, though. She just sits on her sofa, knees
drawn up under her chin, staring out the window.
   "The security's better on campus," I say. "We can make room
for you. And you won't have to commute."
   Janet doesn't answer. Inside the TV, a talking head delivers a
lecture on the Poisoned Fruits Of Secular Science.
    "Jan--"
   "I'm okay, Keith. Nobody's gotten in yet."
   "They will. All they've got to do is throw a rubber mat over the
fence and they're past the first line of defense. Sooner or later
they'll crack the codes for the front gate, or--"
   "No, Keith. That would take too much planning."
   "Janet, I'm telling you--"
   "Nothing's organized any more, Keith. Haven't you noticed?"
   Several faint explosions echo from somewhere outside.
   "I've noticed," I tell her.
   "For the past four years," she says, as though I haven't spoken,
"all the patterns have just...fallen apart. Things are getting so hard
to predict, lately, you know? And even when you seem them
coming, you can't do anything about them."
    She glances at the television, where the head is explaining that
evolution contradicts the Second Law of Thermodynamics.
   "It's sort of funny, actually," Janet says.
   "What is?"
   "Everything. Second Law." She gestures at the screen.
"Entropy increasing, order to disorder. Heat death of the universe.
All that shit."
   "Funny?"
   "I mean, life's a pretty pathetic affair in the face of physics. It is
sort of a miracle it ever got started in the first place."
   "Hey." I try for a disarming smile. "You're starting to sound
like a creationist."
   "Yeah, well in a way they're right. Life and entropy just don't
get along. Not in the long run, anyway. Evolution's just a -- a
holding action, you know?"
Peter Watts                                                       15

   "I know, Jan."
   "It's like this, this torrent screaming through time and space,
tearing everything apart. And sometimes these little pockets of
information form in the eddies, in these tiny protected backwaters,
and sometimes they get complicated enough to wake up and brag
about beating the odds. Never lasts, though. Takes too much
energy to fight the current."
   I shrug. "That's not exactly news, Jan."
   She manages a brief, tired smile. "Yeah, I guess not.
Undergrad existentialism, huh?           It's just that everything's
so...hungry now, you know?"
   "Hungry?"
   "People. Biological life in general. The Net. That's the whole
problem with complex systems, you know; the more intricate they
get, the harder entropy tries to rip them apart. We need more and
more energy just to keep in one piece."
   She glances out the window.
   "Maybe a bit more," she says, "than we have available these
days."
   Janet leans forward, aims a remote control at the television.
   "You're right, though. It's all old news."
   The smile fades. I'm not sure what replaces it.
   "It just never sunk in before, you know?"
   Exhaustion, maybe.
   She presses the remote. The head fades to black, cut off in mid-
rant. A white dot flickers defiantly on center stage for a moment.
   "There he goes." Her voice hangs somewhere between irony
and resignation. "Washed downstream."
                                   *
   The doorknob rotates easily in my grasp, clockwise,
counterclockwise. It's not locked. A television laughs on the far
side of a wall somewhere.
   I push the door open.
   Orange light skews up from the floor at the far end of the hall,
where the living room lamp has fallen. Her blood is everywhere,
congealing on the floor, crowding the wall with sticky rivulets, thin
dark pseudopods that clot solid while crawling for the baseboards--
16                                                        Bethlehem

    No.
    I push the door open.
    It swings in a few centimeters, then jams. Something on the
other side yields a bit, sags back when I stop pushing. Her hand is
visible through the gap in the doorway, palm up on the floor,
fingers slightly clenched like the limbs of some dead insect. I push
at the door again; the fingers jiggle lifelessly against the hardwood.
    No. Not that either.
    I push the door open.
    They're still in there with her. Four of them. One sits on her
couch, watching television. One pins her to the floor. One rapes
her. One stands smiling in the hallway, waves me in with a hand
wrapped in duct tape, a jagged blob studded with nails and broken
glass.
    Her eyes are open. She doesn't make a sound--
    No. No. No.
    These are mere possibilities. I haven't actually seen any of
them. They haven't happened yet. The door is still closed.
    I push it open.
    The probability wave collapses.
    And the winner is...
    None of the above. It's not even her apartment. It's our office.
    I'm inside the campus perimeter, safe behind carbon-laminate
concrete, guarded by armed patrols and semi-intelligent security
systems that work well over half the time. I will not call her, even
if the phones are working today. I refuse to indulge these sordid
little backflips into worlds that don't even exist.
    I am not losing it.
                                   *
    Her desk has been abandoned for two weeks now. The adjacent
concrete wall, windowless, unpainted, is littered with nostalgic
graphs and printouts; population cycles, fractal intrusions into
Ricker curves, a handwritten reminder that All tautologies are
tautologies.
    I don't know what's happening. We're changing. She's
changing. Of course, you idiot, she was raped, how could she not
change? But it's as though her attacker was only a catalyst,
Peter Watts                                                         17

somehow, a trigger for some transformation still ongoing, cryptic
and opaque. She's shrouded in a chrysalis; something's happening
in there, I see occasional blurred movement, but all the details are
hidden.
    I need her for so much. I need her ability to impose order on the
universe, I need her passionate desire to reduce everything to
triviality. No result was good enough, everything was always too
proximate for her; every solution she threw back in my face: "yes,
but why?" It was like collaborating with a two-year-old.
    I've always been a parasite. I feel like I've lost the vision in one
eye.
    I guess it was ironic. Keith Elliot, quantum physiologist, who
saw infinite possibilities in the simplest units of matter; Janet
Thomas, catastrophe theorist, who reduced whole ecosystems
down to a few lines of computer code. We should have killed each
other. Somehow it was a combination that worked.
    Oh God. When did I start using past tense?
                                   *
    There's a message on the phone, ten hours old. The impossible
has happened; the police caught someone, a suspect. His mug
shots are on file in the message cache.
    He looks a bit like me.
    "Is that him?" I ask her.
    "I don't know." Janet doesn't look away from the window. "I
didn't look."
    "Why not? Maybe he's the one! You don't even have to leave
the apartment, you could just call them back, say yes or no. Jan,
what's going on with you?"
    She cocks her head to one side. "I think," she says, "My eyes
have opened. Things have finally started to make some sort
of...sense, I guess--"
    "Christ, Janet, you were raped, not baptized!"
    She draws her knees up under her chin and starts rocking back
and forth. I can't call it back.
    I try anyway. "Jan, I'm sorry. It's just...I don't understand, you
don't seem to care about anything any more--"
18                                                          Bethlehem

    "I'm not pressing charges." Rocking, rocking. "Whoever it
was. It wasn't his fault."
    I can't speak.
    She looks back over her shoulder. "Entropy increases, Keith.
You know that. Every act of random violence helps the universe
run down."
    "What are you talking about? Some asshole deliberately
assaulted you!"
    She shrugs, looking back out the window. "So some matter is
sentient. That doesn't exempt it from the laws of physics."
    I finally see it; in this insane absolution she confers, in the calm
acceptance in her voice. Metamorphosis is complete. My anger
evaporates. Underneath there is only a sick feeling I can't name.
    "Jan," I say, very quietly.
    She turns and faces me, and there is no reassurance there at all.
    "Things fall apart," she says. "The center cannot hold. Mere
anarchy is loosed upon the world."
    It sounds familiar, somehow, but I can't...I can't...
    "Nothing? You've forgotten Yeats, too?" She shakes her head,
sadly. "You taught it to me."
    I sit beside her. I touch her, for the first time. I take her hands.
    She doesn't look at me. But she doesn't seem to mind.
    "You'll forget everything, soon, Keith. You'll even forget me."
    She looks at me then, and something she sees makes her smile a
little. "You know, in a way I envy you. You're still safe from all
this. You look so closely at everything you barely see anything at
all."
    "Janet..."
    But she seems to have forgotten me.
    After a moment she takes her hands from mine and stands up.
Her shadow, cast orange by the table lamp, looms huge and
ominous on the far wall. But it's her face, calm and unscarred and
only life-sized, that scares me.
    She reaches down, puts her hands on my shoulders. "Keith,
thank you. I could never have come through this without you. But
I'm okay now, and I think it's time to be on my own again."
Peter Watts                                                         19

    A pit opens in my stomach. "You're not okay," I tell her, but I
can't seem to keep my voice level.
    "I'm fine, Keith. Really. I honestly feel better than I have
in...well, in a long time. It's all right for you to go."
    I can't. I can't.
    "I really think you're wrong." I have to keep her talking. I have
to stay calm. "You may not see it but I don't think you should be
on your own just yet, you can't do this--"
    Her eyes twinkle briefly. "Can't do what, Keith?"
    I try to answer but it's hard, I don't even know what I'm trying to
say, I--
    "I can't do it," is what comes out, unexpected. "It's just us,
Janet, against everything. I can't do it without you."
    "Then don't try."
    It's such a stupid thing to say, so completely unexpected, that I
have no answer for it.
    She draws me to my feet. "It's just not that important, Keith.
We study retinal sensitivity in salamanders. Nobody cares. Why
should they? Why should we?"
    "You know it's more than that, Janet! It's quantum neurology,
it's the whole nature of consciousness, it's--"
    "It's really kind of pathetic, you know." Her smile is so gentle,
her voice so kind, that it takes a moment for me to actually realize
what she's saying. "You can change a photon here and there, so
you tell yourself you've got some sort of control over things. But
you don't. None of us do. It all just got too complicated, it's all
just physics--"
    My hand is stinging. There's a sudden white spot, the size of
my palm, on the side of Janet's face. It flushes red as I watch.
    She touches her cheek. "It's okay, Keith. I know how you feel.
I know how everything feels. We're so tired of swimming
upstream all the time..."
    I see her, walking on air.
    "You need to get out of here," I say, talking over the image.
"You should really spend some time on campus, I could put you up
until you get your bearings--"
20                                                         Bethlehem

    "Shhhhh." She puts a finger to my lips, guides me along the
hall. "I'll be fine, Keith. And so will you. Believe me. This is all
for the best."
    She reaches past me and opens the door.
    "I love you," I blurt out.
    She smiles at that, as though she understands. "Goodbye,
Keith."
    She leaves me there and turns back down the hall. I can see part
of her living room from where I stand, I can see her turn and face
the window. The firelight beyond paints her face like a martyr's.
She never stops smiling. Five minutes go by. Ten. Perhaps she
doesn't realize I'm still here, perhaps she's forgotten me already.
    At last, when I finally turn to leave, she speaks. I look back, but
her eyes are still focused on distant wreckage, and her words are
not meant for me.
    "...what rough beast..." is what I think she says, and other
words too faint to make out.
                                     *
    When the news hits the department I try, unsuccessfully, to stay
out of sight. They don't know any next of kin, so they inflict their
feigned sympathy on me. It seems she was popular. I never knew
that. Colleagues and competitors pat me on the back as though
Janet and I were lovers. Sometimes it happens, they say, as though
imparting some new insight. Not your fault. I endure their
commiseration as long as I can, then tell them I want to be alone.
This, at least, they think they understand; and now, my knuckles
stinging from a sudden collision of flesh and glass, now I'm free. I
dive into the eyes of my microscope, escaping down, down into the
real world.
    I used to be so much better than everyone. I spent so much time
down here, nose pressed against the quantum interface, embracing
uncertainties that would drive most people insane. But I'm not at
ease down here. I never was. I'm simply more terrified of the
world outside.
    Things happen out there, and can't be taken back. Janet is gone,
forever. I'll never see her again. That wouldn't happen down here.
Down here nothing is impossible. Janet is alive as well as dead; I
Peter Watts                                                 21

made a difference, and didn't; parents make babies and monsters
and both and neither. Everything that can be, is. Down here,
riding the probability wave, my options stay open forever.
   As long as I keep my eyes closed.
